Content for speculative loading (#29183)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/api/speculation_rules_api/index.md

---
title: Speculation Rules API
slug: Web/API/Speculation_Rules_API
page-type: web-api-overview
status:
  - experimental
browser-compat: html.elements.script.type.speculationrules
---

{{SeeCompatTable}}{{DefaultAPISidebar("Speculation Rules API")}}

> The **Speculation Rules API** is designed to improve performance for future navigations, and so makes sense for multi-page applications (MPAs) rather than single-page applications (SPAs). It is designed to supercede the widely-available [`<link rel="prefetch">`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/rel/prefetch) and the Chrome-only deprecated [`<link rel="prerender">`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/rel/prerender) for providing prefetching and prerendering of future navigations. It provides many improvements over these technologies, along with a more expressive, configurable syntax for specifying which documents should be prefetched or prerendered.

Reviewer: > so makes sense for multi-page applications (MPAs) rather than single-page applications (SPAs)

Why? You still need to fetch resources for an SPA for your next navigation target.

Reviewer: > It is designed to supersede the widely-available [`<link rel="prefetch">`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/rel/prefetch)

> The **Speculation Rules API** is designed to improve performance for future navigations, and so makes sense for multi-page applications (MPAs) rather than single-page applications (SPAs). It is designed to supercede the widely-available [`<link rel="prefetch">`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/rel/prefetch) and the Chrome-only deprecated [`<link rel="prerender">`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/rel/prerender) for providing prefetching and prerendering of future navigations. It provides many improvements over these technologies, along with a more expressive, configurable syntax for specifying which documents should be prefetched or prerendered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **Speculation Rules API** is designed to improve performance for future navigations, and so makes sense for multi-page applications (MPAs) rather than single-page applications (SPAs). It is designed to supersede the widely-available [`<link rel="prefetch">`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/rel/prefetch) and the Chrome-only deprecated [`<link rel="prerender">`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/rel/prerender) for providing prefetching and prerendering of future navigations. It provides many improvements over these technologies, along with a more expressive, configurable syntax for specifying which documents should be prefetched or prerendered.
```

> The **Speculation Rules API** is designed to improve performance for future navigations, and so makes sense for multi-page applications (MPAs) rather than single-page applications (SPAs). It is designed to supersede the widely-available [`<link rel="prefetch">`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/rel/prefetch) and the Chrome-only deprecated [`<link rel="prerender">`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/rel/prerender) for providing prefetching and prerendering of future navigations. It provides many improvements over these technologies, along with a more expressive, configurable syntax for specifying which documents should be prefetched or prerendered.

Reviewer: > so makes sense for multi-page applications (MPAs) rather than single-page applications (SPAs)

Why? You still need to fetch resources for an SPA for your next navigation target.

> It is designed to supersede the widely-available [`<link rel="prefetch">`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/rel/prefetch) ...

FMI what is the signaling for adoption from other browsers? This is obviously what it was designed for, but feels like it would be a bit strong if prefetching is not going away.

Author: So for the first question, I believe this is because it targets document URLs rather than specific resource files. I've added a note about this.

For thye first question, I've altered the wording a bit, to say it provides an alternative to the first, but is designed to supersede the second.

Reviewer: Thanks - that's helpful.

> ## Concepts and usage

Reviewer: It might be that most of this "should" be in a separate "Using speculative loading" - see https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/MDN/Writing_guidelines/Page_structures/Page_types/API_landing_page_template#concepts_and_usage "Don't go into a lot of detail in this section, and don't include code examples. ..."

Reviewer: So you'd explain the very high level without code, then have a few examples. Then all the rest in a "using" doc. I kind of like that approach because from the API page you get quite a high level jump-in flavour.

Reviewer: I can see that you could do this with a very high level overview and some simple examples - it would indeed be trivial, but then at its heart this is a very trivial interface to a very powerful API. You really don't need to know everything we show here to be able to use it, and having that simple flavour is what API overview docs are about.

Most of the information would end up in the Using guide, because even though you don't absolutely need it, all this description is still interesting and knowing "why" is useful.

I support your decision not to do this though - the split often seems arbitrary and it might be disjointed.

Author: Yeah, I want to leave this for now. We can also revisit it later if others feel strongly too.

Speculation rules are specified inside [`<script type="speculationrules"> ... </script>`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/script/type/speculationrules). The rules are specified as a JSON structure.

For example:

```html
<script type="speculationrules">
  {
    "prerender": [
      {
        "source": "list",
        "urls": ["extra.html", "extra2.html"]
      }
    ],
    "prefetch": [
      {
        "source": "list",
        "urls": ["next.html", "next2.html"],
        "requires": ["anonymous-client-ip-when-cross-origin"],
        "referrer_policy": "no-referrer"
      }
    ]
  }
</script>
```

> You specify a different array to contain the rules for each speculative loading type (for example `"prerender"` or `"prefetch"`). Each rule is contained in an object that specifies for example a list of resources to be fetched, plus options such as an explicit [`Referrer-Policy`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Referrer-Policy) setting for each rule.

Reviewer: Worth saying here that stuff in prerender is also prefetched?

Author: Good call. Added.

See [`<script type="speculationrules">`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/script/type/speculationrules) for a full explanation of the available syntax.

> **Note:** As speculation rules use a `<script>` element, they need to be explicitly allowed in the [`Content-Security-Policy`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Security-Policy) [`script-src`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Security-Policy/script-src) directive if the site includes it. This is done by adding the `'inline-speculation-rules'` source along with a hash- or nonce-source.

### Using prefetching

> Including `prefetch` rules inside `<script type=speculationrules> ... </script>` will cause supporting browsers to download the response body of the referenced pages, but none of the subresources referenced by the page. The results are kept in a per-document in-memory cache. When a prefetched page is navigated to, it will render much more quickly than if it were not prefetched.
> 
> If you prefetch something the user doesn't navigate to, it is generally a waste of resources, although the result may populate the HTTP cache if headers allow. That said, the upfront cost of a prefetch is much smaller than the upfront cost of a prerender, so you are encouraged to adopt prefetching broadly, for example prefetching all of the significant pages on your site, provided they are safe to prefetch (see [Unsafe speculative loading conditions](#unsafe_speculative_loading_conditions) for more details).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Including `prefetch` rules inside `<script type=speculationrules> ... </script>` will cause supporting browsers to download the response body of the referenced pages, but none of the subresources referenced by the page. When a prefetched page is navigated to, it will render much more quickly than if it were not prefetched.

 The results are kept in a per-document in-memory cache. If you prefetch something the user doesn't navigate to, it is generally a waste of resources, although the result may populate the HTTP cache if headers allow. That said, the upfront cost of a prefetch is much smaller than the upfront cost of a prerender, so you are encouraged to adopt prefetching broadly, for example prefetching all of the significant pages on your site, provided they are safe to prefetch (see [Unsafe speculative loading conditions](#unsafe_speculative_loading_conditions) for more details).
```

Author: Updated

> Same-site and cross-site prefetches will work, but cross-site prefetches are limited, for security purposes — they will currently only work if the user has no cookies set for the destination site. In the future an opt-in will be provided via the [`Supports-Loading-Mode`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Supports-Loading-Mode) header, but this was not implemented at the time of writing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Same-site and cross-site prefetches will work, but cross-site prefetches are limited, for security reasons — they will currently only work if the user has no cookies set for the destination site. In the future an opt-in will be provided via the [`Supports-Loading-Mode`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Supports-Loading-Mode) header, but this was not implemented at the time of writing.
```

Reviewer: Note, I don't understand the security reasons, or why not having cookies for the destination makes this safe. Perhaps it gets explained later (or isn't necessary to know).

Author: I have made the requested change. I never found an answer as to "why"...

Reviewer 2: The why is the following:

- Let's say I've Google searched for "engagement ring"
- Google search results page prefetches the top result, `https://example.com/cool-engagement-rings`.
- If I have cookies for `https://example.com/`, then `https://example.com/` basically "knows who I am" (since it probably stored a user ID in the cookie), and so knows I am searching for engagement rings on this date. Maybe it will use that info for nefarious purposes, like suddenly upping its marketing campaigns or selling the data to ad networks.
  - It's a privacy breach to leak them this info. So, the browser refuses to do the prefetch.
- On the other hand, if I have no cookies, then `https://example.com/` might store some during the prefetch, saying "ah, this is new user # 12345. Let's track them from now on when they visit."
  - If I activate the prefetch, then the browser keeps this cookie. It's fine to let people store cookies once the user actually sees a navigation happen.
  - If I don't activate this prefetch, then the browser throws away this cookie. Kind of like a visit in a private browsing tab.

Author: Ah, I get it. Thanks @domenic. So I don't think this requires a huge drill down, but I have given some information on the security reason by updating the first sentence (in my next commit) to:

> Same-site and cross-site prefetches will work, but cross-site prefetches are limited. For security reasons they will currently only work if the user has no cookies set for the destination site — we don't want sites to be able to track user activity via prefetched pages (which they may never even actually visit) based on previously-set cookies.

Reviewer: FWIW that seems a good balance to me (And thanks @domenic).

For browsers that support it, speculation rules prefetch should be preferred over older prefetch mechanisms, namely [`<link rel="prefetch">`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/rel/prefetch) and {{domxref("fetch()")}} with a `priority: "low"` option set on it. Because we know that speculation rules prefetch is for navigations, not general resource prefetching:

- It can be used for cross-site navigations, whereas `<link rel="prefetch">` cannot.
- It doesn't get blocked by [Cache-Control](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Cache-Control) settings, whereas `<link rel="prefetch">` often does.

In addition, speculation rules prefetch:

- Automatically lowers the priority when needed (`fetch()` doesn't).

> - Is respectful of the user's configuration, for example it doesn't happen when in the user's device is in Battery Saver or Data Saver mode.

Reviewer: Typo "when in the"
```suggestion
- Is respectful of the user's configuration. For example prefetching doesn't happen when the user's device is in Battery Saver or Data Saver mode.
```

Author: Updated

- Stores the prefetched resources in a per-document in-memory cache as opposed to the HTTP cache, which may result in slightly faster prefetching.

### Using prerendering

> Including `prerender` rules inside `<script type=speculationrules> ... </script>` will cause supporting browsers to render and load the content into an invisible tab, stored in a per-document in-memory cache. This includes loading all subresources, running all JavaScript, and even loading subresources and performing data fetches started by JavaScript.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Including `prerender` rules inside `<script type=speculationrules> ... </script>` will cause supporting browsers to fetch, render, and load, the content into an invisible tab, stored in a per-document in-memory cache. This includes loading all subresources, running all JavaScript, and even loading subresources and performing data fetches started by JavaScript.
```

> Future navigations to that page will be instant. The browser activates the invisible tab instead of carrying out the usual navigation process, instantly replacing the old foreground page with the prerendered page. If a page is activated before it has fully prerendered, then its current state is "foregrounded" and continues to load, which means you can still see a significant performance improvement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Future navigations to that page will be near-instant. The browser activates the invisible tab instead of carrying out the usual navigation process, instantly replacing the old foreground page with the prerendered page. If a page is activated before it has fully prerendered, then its current state is "foregrounded" and continues to load, which means you can still see a significant performance improvement.
```

Reviewer: > then its current state is "foregrounded"

What does that mean?

Author: I've implemented the above suggestion and removed "foregrounding". I replaced that sentence with:

> If a page is activated before it has fully prerendered, it is activated in its current state and then continues to load, which means you will still see a significant performance improvement.

> Prerendering uses additional memory and network bandwidth. If you prerender something the user doesn't navigate to, it is a significant waste of resources, although the result may populate the HTTP cache if headers allow. The upfront cost of a prerender is much larger than the upfront cost of a prefetch, and there are more conditions that could make content unsafe to prerender (see [Unsafe speculative loading conditions](#unsafe_speculative_loading_conditions) for more details). As a result, you are encouraged to adopt prerendering more sparingly, carefully considering cases where there is a high likelihood of the page being navigated to, and you think the user experience benefit is worth the extra work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prerendering uses memory and network bandwidth. If you prerender something the user doesn't navigate to, these are wasted, although the result may populate the HTTP cache if headers allow. The upfront cost of a prerender is much larger than the upfront cost of a prefetch, and there are more conditions that could make content unsafe to prerender (see [Unsafe speculative loading conditions](#unsafe_speculative_loading_conditions) for more details). As a result, you are encouraged to adopt prerendering more sparingly, carefully considering cases where there is a high likelihood of the page being navigated to, and you think the user experience benefit is worth the extra work.
```

Reviewer: So the implication here is that if you prerender there is cost, and if you don't navigate to the page then that resource is thrown away. Is that true? If so, what are the discard rules?

Author: I have implemented your suggestion as I think it is good, but I can't find an answer to your question.

@domenic do you have an answer to this?

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I understand the question. If the user doesn't activate the prerender, then the prerendered "hidden tab" is thrown away, in the sense that it's not shown to the user. (As the PR notes, some resources might populate the HTTP cache, so it's not a total loss.)

Whereas, if the user activates, then it's great: everything is used.

I'm not sure how this could be different...

Author: I'm wondering if Hamish is thinking of things such as whether there is a time limit for a pretender to be kept, after which it is thrown away if the user doesn't navigate to it...or whether there are any other conditions to be aware of where it is discarded. I'll let Hamish chime in too.

Reviewer: >>  If so, what are the discard rules?

>  things such as whether there is a time limit for a prerender to be kept, after which it is thrown away if the user doesn't navigate to it

@domenic @chrisdavidmills 

That's it. _When I read this text_ it wasn't clear to me if prerendered content is discarded immediately if you navigate to a different page, or kept in some kind of cache for a time even after navigating. If it was kept in some kind of cache then the text would have been inaccurate, because the rendered page wouldn't necessarily be wasted. It might also be that prerendered content 

Somewhere else I read that when you navigate to a page, any other pages that had been prerendered are discarded. _I think it is worth saying that very clearly up front in the introduction._

We need a similar statement for prefetch via speculation API so that people know how long the data is stored.

That's also what I was rambling on about in another question somewhere about "lifecycle".

Reviewer 2: Hmm, I see. Yes, this is implicit in the definition of "per-document in-memory cache". Because the document gets discarded when you navigate away from it, so do any cached prefetches/prerenders. (Except, possibly, the single one that was activated.)

Reviewer: Excellent. Even though it is implicit, and now you say it this  is obvious, I think worth spelling out for people like me :-).  Let's see what Chris comes up with.

Author: Yup, this makes sense, and it is definitely good to spell this out. I've included the following notes in appropriate places:

> **Note:** Such is the nature of the per-document in-memory cache, any cached prefetches are discarded when you navigate away from the current page, except of course a prefetched document that you then navigate to.

> **Note:** Such is the nature of the per-document in-memory cache, any cached prerenders and their subresources are discarded when you navigate away from the current page, except of course a prerendered document that you then navigate to.

Does this wording sound OK?

Reviewer: I've suggested this doesn't have to be a note in one "test" case: https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/29183/files#r1342211331 . I prefer this approach, but appreciate you might not.

If you do want a note, I would be more terse - it is OK for people to infer the reason as long as we provide the result.

> **Note:** Any cached prerenders and their subresources are discarded when you navigate away from the current page, except of course a prerendered document that you then navigate to.

> Prerendering is restricted to same-site documents. Cross-origin, same-site prerendering is possible — it requires the destination origin to opt-in using the [`Supports-Loading-Mode`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Supports-Loading-Mode) header with a value of `credentialed-prerender`.

Reviewer: What's a "destination origin"?

Author: Basically, yes. I've replaced it with "navigation destination site". Does that work better?

Reviewer: Yes, that or "navigation target" is much better.

Author: Yeah, that _is_ better. More concise and to the point. I'll update any instances in the PR.

> Prerendering is restricted to same-site documents. Cross-origin, same-site prerendering is possible — it requires the destination origin to opt-in using the [`Supports-Loading-Mode`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Supports-Loading-Mode) header with a value of `credentialed-prerender`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prerendering is restricted to same-site documents by default. Cross-origin, same-site prerendering is possible — it requires the destination origin to opt-in using the [`Supports-Loading-Mode`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Supports-Loading-Mode) header with a value of `credentialed-prerender`.
```

For browsers that support it, speculation rules prerender should be preferred over older prerender mechanisms, namely [`<link rel="prerender">`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/rel/prerender):

- `<link rel="prerender">` is Chrome-specific and was never standardized, and the Chrome engineering team are in the proess of sunsetting it.
- It loads subresources loaded via JavaScript, whereas `<link rel="prerender">` doesn't.
- It doesn't get blocked by [Cache-Control](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Cache-Control) settings, whereas `<link rel="prerender">` often does.

> - Speculation rules prerender should be treated as a hint and a progressive enhancement. Unlike `<link rel="prerender">`, it is a speculative hint and the browser may choose not to act upon the hint based on user settings, current memory usage, or other heuristics.

Reviewer: This, and the section for prerendering are fine, but I _wonder_ if it might be worth having them in their own comparative section rather than hard selling here.

Author: I think it is OK as-is; it is not exactly a hard sell, as the alternative is Chrome-only and not a standard.

### Speculation rules API feature detection

> You can feature detect the Speculation Rules API using the following snippet:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can check if the Speculation Rules API is supported using the following code:
```

Author: Updated

```js
if (
  HTMLScriptElement.supports &&
  HTMLScriptElement.supports("speculationrules")
) {
  console.log("Your browser supports the Speculation Rules API.");
}
```

For example, you might want to insert speculation rules for prefetching in supporting browsers, but use an older technology such as `<link rel="prefetch">` in others:

```js
if (
  HTMLScriptElement.supports &&
  HTMLScriptElement.supports("speculationrules")
) {
  const specScript = document.createElement("script");
  specScript.type = "speculationrules";
  specRules = {
    prefetch: [
      {
        source: "list",
        urls: ["/next.html"],
      },
    ],
  };
  specScript.textContent = JSON.stringify(specRules);
  document.body.append(specScript);
} else {
  const linkElem = document.createElement("link");
  linkElem.rel = "prefetch";
  linkElem.href = "/next.html";
  document.head.append(linkElem);
}
```

> ## Detecting prefetched and prerendered pages

Reviewer: Title might need work - "what" is detecting these pages? I know it's the server now I've read it, and that this is one way for a server to configure it's response.

Author: I've fixed this by adding a descriptive subheading for the server-side detection, plus a lead-in sentence so that we don't get stuck with an h2 and h3 jammed together.

Prefetched and prerendered page requests are sent with the [Sec-Purpose](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Sec-Purpose) request header, for example:

```http
Sec-Purpose: prefetch;prerender
```

Servers can respond based on this header, for example to log prerender requests, return different content, or even prevent the prerender from happening. If a non-success response code is returned (not 200 or 304), then the page will not be prerendered. This is the easiest way to ensure that a page will not be prefetched/prerendered, although it is usually a better approach to allow the prefetch/prerender, but delay any actions that should only happen then the page is actually viewed, using JavaScript.

### JavaScript prefetch detection

> When a page is prefetched, its {{domxref("PerformanceResourceTiming.deliveryType")}} entry will return a value of `"navigational-prefetch"`. For example, you could use a {{domxref("PerformanceObserver")}} to run a function when performance entries of type `"navigational-prefetch"` are received:

Reviewer: So this won't be set for a prerendered page, even though it is probably also stored in-memory?

Just FMI when would you do this? Just for performance checking?

Author: This is explained in the next section. I've added links.

```js
const intervalID = setInterval(() => {
  if (!document.prerendering) {
    initAnalytics(); // Author-defined function
    clearInterval(intervalID);
  } else {
    // Still prerendering
  }
}, 50);
```

When a prerendered document is activated, {{domxref("PerformanceNavigationTiming.activationStart")}} is set to a non-zero time representing the time between when the prerender was started and the document was actually activated. The following function can check for prerendering _and_ prerendered pages:

```js
function pagePrerendered() {
  return (
    document.prerendering ||
    self.performance?.getEntriesByType?.("navigation")[0]?.activationStart > 0
  );
}
```

When the prerendered page is activated by the user viewing the page, the {{domxref("Document.prerenderingchange_event", "prerenderingchange")}} event will fire. This can be used to enable activities that previously would be started by default on page load but which you wish to delay until the page is actually viewed by the user.

```js
document.addEventListener("prerenderingchange", initializeView);

function initializeView() {

>   // Author-defined function

Reviewer: Would be good to have some statements around what you might want to defer. I guess you don't want analytics because otherwise you'll get a false indication of how long the page was displayed - that's worth saying. What else? I guess dynamic calculation that affects rendering?

}
```

## Unsafe speculative loading conditions

This section covers conditions to look out for, under which prefetching and/or prerendering are **unsafe**. This means that prefetching/prerendering pages that exhibit these conditions may require mitigations in your code, or need to be avoided altogether.

### Unsafe prefetching

As mentioned earlier, we recommend adopting prefetching broadly, as the risk to reward ratio is fairly low — the potential for resource wastage is minimal, and the performance improvements can be significant. However, you need to make sure prefetched pages do not cause problems with the flow of your application.

> When a prefetch is done, the browser downloads the response body of the referenced page via a single GET request, which the user may navigate to at a future time. Problems can arise specifically when the URL of the request performs a server-initiated side effect that you don't want to happen until the URL is actually navigated to (which can also involve setting a cookie).

Reviewer: >  (which can also involve setting a cookie)

I don't know what this means. I.e. are you saying that you don't want to set a cookie until the user has actually visited the page?

Author: I don't know what I was thinking here. I've just deleted the paren part.

For example:

- Sign-out URLs.
- Language switching URLs.
- "Add to cart" URLs.
- Sign-in flow URLs where the server causes an SMS to be sent, for example as a one-time password (OTP).
- URLs that increment a user's usage allowance numbers, such as consuming their monthly free article allowance or starting the timer on their monthly minutes.
- URLs that initiate server-side ad conversion tracking.

> Such issues can be mitigated by watching for the [`Sec-Purpose: prefetch`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Sec-Purpose) header on the server as the requests come in, and then running specific code to handle prefetch cases. When the page is actually navigated to, you can detect the prefetched nature using JavaScript and initiate the deferred functionality then. If the side effect only occurs when JavaScript runs, then prefetching is safe, since the JavaScript will not run until activation.

Reviewer: THis is a little confusing/ed as to who is running the code. IN the first case it is a server, "and then running specific code to handle prefetch cases". But then the next sentence is talking about JavaScript code. I think you need to be a bit more concrete in the example.

Author: I see what you mean. I've tried rewriting it; see if you think my rewrite is any better.

> > **Note:** You can find more details about the detection code in the [Detecting prefetch and prerender](#detecting_prefetch_and_prerender) section.

Reviewer: Note, I've suggested renaming this above, so you might need to change this link if you agree.

Author: Link was wrong anyway. Updated ;-)

It is also potentially risky to prefetch a document whose server-rendered contents will change due to actions the user can take on the current page. This could include, for example, flash sale pages or movie theater seat maps. Test such cases carefully, and mitigate such issues by updating content once the page is loaded. See [Server-rendered varying state](#server-rendered_varying_state) for more details about these cases.

> > **Note:** Browsers will cache prefetched pages for a short time (Chrome for example caches them for for 5 minutes) before discarding them, so in any case, your users might see content that is up to 5 minutes out of date.

Reviewer: This used to be true for prefetch pages stored in the HTTP cache (I think). Is it still true, and for speculation cache?
I think a dedicated section/para for prefetch and prerender covering lifecycle of the cache would be useful.

Author: I believe so, yes. I already asked a question about discard rules above, so that should elicit some relevant info.

One final tip is to audit the URLs listed as disallowed in your [`Robots.txt`](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Robots.txt) file — normally URLs included here point to pages that can only be accessed by authenticated users, and therefore should not be included in search engine results. Many of these will be fine, but it can be a good place to find URLs unsafe for prefetching (i.e. they exhibit the conditions described above).

### Unsafe prerendering

> Prerendering is more risky to adopt than prefetching and should therefore be done more sparingly in cases where it is worth it. There are more unsafe conditions to watch out for with prerendering, and the risk to reward ratio is somewhat higher. Although the performance improvements can be larger, the potential for resource wastage is also larger.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prerendering is more risky to adopt than prefetching and should therefore be done more sparingly, in cases where it is worth it. There are more unsafe conditions to watch out for with prerendering, and the risk to reward ratio is somewhat higher. Although the performance improvements can be larger, the potential for resource wastage is also larger.
```

Author: Updated

When a prerender is done, the browser GETs the URL and renders and loads the content into an invisible tab. This includes running the content's JavaScript and loading all subresources, including those fetched by JavaScript. Content can be potentially unsafe to prerender if any of the following conditions are observed:

> - The URL is [unsafe to prefetch](#unsafe_prefetching). Read the previous section first if you haven't already, and understand that these conditions also equally apply to unsafe prerendering. Put another way, documents that are safe to prerender must also be safe to prefetch.

Reviewer: Remove this bit - it isn't useful. It would be if you could say "Documents that are safe to prefetch are also safe to prerender" (but I doubt that)?
```suggestion
- The URL is [unsafe to prefetch](#unsafe_prefetching). Read the previous section first if you haven't already, and understand that these conditions also equally apply to unsafe prerendering.
```

Author: OK, removed.

> - The page's JavaScript modifies clent-side storage (for example [Web Storage](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Storage_API) or [IndexedDB](/en-US/docs/Web/API/IndexedDB_API)) on load in a way that may cause the page to be out of date once the user actually views the page.

Reviewer: I guess this also covers cases like a pong game (say) where you load the page and it starts immediately - if state matters, you can defer that until after the user sees the page.

Author: Yup

> - The page runs JavaScript or loads images that cause side effects such as sending analytics, recording ad impressions, or otherwise modifies the state of the application as if the user had already interacted with it. Again, this can cause the page to be out of date once the user actually views it, or affect the flow of the application. See [Server-rendered varying state](#server-rendered_varying_state) for more details about such use cases.

Reviewer: Maybe
```suggestion
- The page runs JavaScript or loads images that cause side effects such as sending analytics, recording ad impressions, or otherwise modifies the state of the application as if the user had already interacted with it. Again, this can cause the page to be out of date once the user actually views it, or affect the flow of the application, or result in incorrect performance and usage reporting. See [Server-rendered varying state](#server-rendered_varying_state) for more details about such use cases.
```

Author: This does make sense. Added.

To mitigate such problems, you can use the following techniques:

> - Watch for the [`Sec-Purpose: prerender`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Sec-Purpose) header on the server as the requests come in, and then run specific code to handle prerender cases.

Reviewer: As before, I don't have a feel from previous comments for what the server might do in code (whereas I do for browser).

Author: I'm not sure either, but I think it is probably along the lines of deferring problematic functionality. I've updated the wording to suit.

  - If the above is not possible, then you could still rerun code after the page is activated to bring the app up-to-date again. For example, a highly-dynamic flash sale page might rely on content updates coming in from a third-party library. If you can't delay the updates, you can always get fresh updates once the user views the page. Prerendered pages can be updated in real time using the [Broadcast Channel API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Broadcast_Channel_API). This guarantees that the user will see up-to-date content after prerendering activation, across multiple non-prerendered tabs if needed.
- Manage your third-party analytics scripts carefully — if possible, use scripts that are prerendering-aware (for example use the {{domxref("Document.prerendering")}} property to defer running on prerendering pages) such as Google Analytics or NewRelic.

>   - Note that cross-origin {{htmlelement("iframe")}} loads are delayed while prerendering, therefore most other third-party widgets such as adtech are actually safe to use while prerendering.

Reviewer: This feels like first time it has been mentioned. Is this a property of prerendering that needs to be recorded at a higher level?

Author: It definitely needs mentioning in the list of "Platform features deferred or restricted during pretender". I've added it.

  - `https://site.example/b` prerenders `https://site.example/c`. It will be prerendered in a logged-out state.
  - The user signs in to `https://site.example` in tab 1.
  - The user switches to tab 2 and clicks the link to `https://site.example/c`, which activates the prerendered page.
  - Tab 2 displays a signed-out view of `https://site.example/c`, which confuses the user since they thought they were logged in.

User-specific state problems can occur for other user settings, for example language settings, dark-mode preferences, or adding items to a cart. They can also occur when only a single tab is involved:

- Let's say the user visits `https://site.example/product`.
- `https://site.example.com/product` prerenders `https://site.example.com/cart`. It prerenders with 0 items in the cart.
- The user clicks on the "Add to cart" buttons, which initiates a fetch request to add the item to the user's cart (with no page reload).
- The user clicks on the link to `https://site.example.com/cart`, which activates the prerendered page.
- The user sees an empty cart, even though they just added something to it.

> The best mitigation for these cases is to perform client-side updates to the speculatively loaded pages. This means the user gets the benefit of the speculatively loaded content, which can be slightly out-of-date, then the state update can occur afterwards.

Reviewer: These are good examples. How does one do client-side updates? Service worker? I.e. I think we need a bit more information here on the specific mechanisms to achieve it.

Author: We mention earlier that the broadcast channel API is a good way to do this. I've added another mention here.

@domenic are there any other details we should mention here?

Reviewer 2: Generally any technique that a site might use to make sure it is displaying fresh data will work. `BroadcastChannel` is nice because you can get "pushed" updates, but you could also pull updates using `fetch()`, or keep an open `WebSocket`, or...

Basically, if your site is already an auto-updating type of thing that works well across multiple tabs being open at the same time, you're probably fine. (Social media sites are a common example.) If not, tread cautiously.

Author: I've added some more information in:

> The best mitigation for these cases is to perform client-side updates to the speculatively loaded pages. This means the user gets the benefit of the speculatively loaded content, which can be slightly out-of-date, then the state update can occur afterwards. As mentioned earlier, prerendered pages can be updated in real time using the [Broadcast Channel API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Broadcast_Channel_API), or another mechanism such as {{domxref("fetch()")}} or a {{domxref("WebSocket")}}. This guarantees that the user will see up-to-date content after prerendering activation, across multiple non-prerendered tabs if needed. If your site already auto-updates across multiple tabs then you are probably OK as-is.

Reviewer: > Basically, if your site is already an auto-updating type of thing that works well across multiple tabs being open at the same time, you're probably fine.

I have never done an auto-updating site, so perhaps the question is stupid. But I still don't understand the mechanics.

Say I indicate that I want to prerender the page. That page might go out of date before I navigate to it. How do I, as a developer actually tell the browser I need it to re-fetch the data -  the prerendered tab is a black box - I don't really know whether the browser is even prerendering it or not.
Is it that the page, once displayed, might update itself by initiating a server refresh?

Reviewer 2: There are many options for creating auto-updating pages, none of them specific to prerendering. I will try to explain them in some more detail.

- You can periodically call `fetch()` to get new data, and update your DOM. Remember that JavaScript runs in prerendered pages so this works fine. For example, this is probably what sites like twitter.com do to display "X unread posts" or update the sidebar notifications badge.

- You can keep an open `WebSocket` to an endpoint which streams in new data modifications from the server. This is commonly used for "real-time" apps like market displays, that keep themselves updated whether or not the user is looking at the tab.

- You can use `BroadcastChannel` for tabs to notify each other about when something changes. This includes both normal tabs and prerendered pages. For example, sites such as GitHub.com do this to display changes in logged-in status, sending a BroadcastChannel message so that other tabs can display a message like "you logged in in another tab; please press refresh to see the logged-in view". (Or they could respond to the message by just calling `window.reload()`, or by using `fetch()` to update the page dynamically to the logged-in view.)

And indeed, you could do all of these things only after `prerenderingchange` indicates you're activated. But it's better if you just design your site so that *all* tabs see real-time updates, whether they're hidden prerendered tabs, or normal tabs the user is just currently not looking at.

Reviewer: Thank you very much - I was missing the bit that the prerendered page is alive and running JavaScript.

So in summary, it might be better if we say something along the lines of "if your page needs to always be up to date it should keep itself updated irrespective of whether it is prerendering or foreground."
At the moment the focus on speculation rules hides this a bit, in particular the sentence 

> "means the user gets the benefit of the speculatively loaded content, which can be slightly out-of-date, then the state update can occur afterwards. "

I think it is because "afterwards" to me felt like "after the page is displayed" but it means to imply "after initial fetch even while still a prerendered page.

Author: Right, I'm not sure if I want to go too deep into the actual code patterns for the auto-updates, but I've attempted to clear up this confusion by updating the problematic paragraph to this:

> The best mitigation for these cases is to perform client-side updates to the speculatively loaded pages. The user will get the performance benefit of the speculatively loaded content, which may be slightly out-of-date by the time the page is activated due to JavaScript running on the page while it is being prerendered. The state can then be brought up-to-date once the page is activated.

WDYT?

Reviewer: I think it misses the point - the code can be brought up to date at any point, including before the page is activated. This still  implies that you have to wait until a page is activated to work on it. Of course you could do that, but I like the idea that "doing the right thing" here has nothing to do with speculative loading.

So maybe something _along the lines of_:

> The best mitigation for these cases, and indeed any time when content can get out of sync with the server, is for pages to refresh themselves as needed.
> For example, a server might use the [Broadcast Channel API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Broadcast_Channel_API) to notify connected pages that the content has changed.
> Pages can then updated themselves appropriately, including speculatively loaded pages that have not yet activated.

> ## Session history behavior for prerendered documents

Reviewer: Are all these supposed to be level 2 or part of concepts and usage?

Author: I intended it to be an h2; it is quite an important detail that I wanted to be found using the right-hand nav.

> Activating a prerendering/prerendered document behaves like any conventional navigation, for the end-user perspective. The activated document is displayed in the tab and appended to session history, and any existing forward history entries are pruned. Any navigations taking place within the prerendering browsing context _before_ activation do not affect the session history.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Activating a prerendering/prerendered document behaves like any conventional navigation, from the end-user perspective. The activated document is displayed in the tab and appended to session history, and any existing forward history entries are pruned. Any navigations taking place within the prerendering browsing context _before_ activation do not affect the session history.
```

Reviewer: > and any existing forward history entries are pruned

It think this is what I was looking for - prerenders are stored until any page is navigated to?

This design ensures that users get the expected experience when using the back button — i.e. that they are taken back to the last thing they saw. Once a prerendering document is activated, only a single session history entry gets appended to the joint session history, ignoring any previous navigations that happened within the prerendering browsing context. Going back one step in the joint session history — for example by pressing the back button — takes the user back to the referrer page.

## Platform features deferred or restricted during prerender

Because a prerendered page is opened in a hidden state, a number of APIs and other web platform features that cause potentially intrusive behaviors are not activated in this state, and are instead deferred until the page is activated or restricted altogether. In the small number of cases where this is not yet possible, the prerender is canceled.

> ### Asynchronous API defferal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Asynchronous API deferral
```

Author: Updated. Ta!

> The following asynchronous features' results are deferred in prerendered documents until they are activated:

Reviewer: This is really useful. I think it is an aspect of the design that should be mentioned in the concepts up the top. Something like "many APIs [LINK TO HERE] will be automatically deferred when prerendering/until activation".

My reasoning is that it otherwise it isn't obvious that you can ignore a whole bunch of application customization you would otherwise have to do to make your page safe for pre-rendering.

Author: Good call. note added.

### Other restricted features

- Download links, i.e. {{htmlelement("a")}} and {{htmlelement("area")}} elements with the `download` attribute.
  (for example, prompts)
- No cross site navigations: Any prerendering document that navigates to a different site will be immediately discarded before a request to that other site is sent,
- Restricted URLs: Prerendering documents cannot host non-HTTP(S) top-level URLs. In particular, they cannot host:
  - `javascript:` URLs
  - `data:` URLs
  - `blob:` URLs
  - `about:` URLs, including `about:blank` and `about:srcdoc`
- Session storage: {{domxref("Window.sessionStorage")}} can be used, but the behavior is very specific, to avoid breaking sites that expect only one page to access the tab's session storage at a time. A prerendered page therefore starts out with a clone of the tab's session storage state from when it was created. Upon activation, the prerendered page's storage clone is discarded, and the tab's main storage state is used instead. Pages that use session storage can use the {{domxref("Document.prerenderingchange_event", "prerenderingchange")}} event to detect when this storage swap occurs.
- {{domxref("Window.print()")}}

> - Workers: Workers can be used, but their execution is deferred until the prerendered document is activated

Reviewer: Presumably this does not include service workers, which I hope are keeping prerendered content up to date with server?

Author: Yes. I've updated the entry to make it clear we mean dedicated/shared workers, and that the scripts are loaded but the execution is then deferred

### Using prefetching

Including `prefetch` rules inside `<script type=speculationrules> ... </script>` will cause supporting browsers to download the response body of the referenced pages, but none of the subresources referenced by the page. When a prefetched page is navigated to, it will render much more quickly than if it were not prefetched.

The results are kept in a per-document in-memory cache. If you prefetch something the user doesn't navigate to, it is generally a waste of resources, although the result may populate the HTTP cache if headers allow. That said, the upfront cost of a prefetch is much smaller than the upfront cost of a prerender, so you are encouraged to adopt prefetching broadly, for example prefetching all of the significant pages on your site, provided they are safe to prefetch (see [Unsafe speculative loading conditions](#unsafe_speculative_loading_conditions) for more details).

> Same-site and cross-site prefetches will work, but cross-site prefetches are limited. For security reasons they will currently only work if the user has no cookies set for the destination site. In the future an opt-in will be provided via the [`Supports-Loading-Mode`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Supports-Loading-Mode) header, but this was not implemented at the time of writing.

Author: Changed.

> Same-site and cross-site prefetches will work, but cross-site prefetches are limited. For security reasons they will currently only work if the user has no cookies set for the destination site. In the future an opt-in will be provided via the [`Supports-Loading-Mode`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Supports-Loading-Mode) header, but this was not implemented at the time of writing.

Author: Unfortunately not. I've included a link to the web.dev page, as it is super useful.

For browsers that support it, speculation rules prefetch should be preferred over older prefetch mechanisms, namely [`<link rel="prefetch">`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/rel/prefetch) and {{domxref("fetch()")}} with a `priority: "low"` option set on it. Because we know that speculation rules prefetch is for navigations, not general resource prefetching:

- It can be used for cross-site navigations, whereas `<link rel="prefetch">` cannot.

> - It doesn't get blocked by [Cache-Control](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Cache-Control) settings, whereas `<link rel="prefetch">` often does.

Author: Updated

Prerendering uses memory and network bandwidth. If you prerender something the user doesn't navigate to, these are wasted (although the result may populate the HTTP cache if headers allow, allowing later use). The upfront cost of a prerender is much larger than the upfront cost of a prefetch, and there are more conditions that could make content unsafe to prerender (see [Unsafe speculative loading conditions](#unsafe_speculative_loading_conditions) for more details). As a result, you are encouraged to adopt prerendering more sparingly, carefully considering cases where there is a high likelihood of the page being navigated to, and you think the user experience benefit is worth the extra cost.

> **Note:** Many APIs will be automatically deferred when prerendering/until activation. See [Platform features deferred or restricted during prerender](#platform_features_deferred_or_restricted_during_prerender) for more details.

> Prerendering is restricted to same-site documents by default. Cross-origin, same-site prerendering is possible — it requires the navigation destination site to opt-in using the [`Supports-Loading-Mode`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Supports-Loading-Mode) header with a value of `credentialed-prerender`.

Author: Updated

- It loads subresources loaded via JavaScript, whereas `<link rel="prerender">` doesn't.
- It doesn't get blocked by [Cache-Control](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Cache-Control) settings, whereas `<link rel="prerender">` often does.
- Speculation rules prerender should be treated as a hint and a progressive enhancement. Unlike `<link rel="prerender">`, it is a speculative hint and the browser may choose not to act upon the hint based on user settings, current memory usage, or other heuristics.

### Speculation rules API feature detection

You can check if the Speculation Rules API is supported using the following code:

```js
if (
  HTMLScriptElement.supports &&
  HTMLScriptElement.supports("speculationrules")
) {
  console.log("Your browser supports the Speculation Rules API.");
}
```

For example, you might want to insert speculation rules for prefetching in supporting browsers, but use an older technology such as `<link rel="prefetch">` in others:

```js
if (
  HTMLScriptElement.supports &&
  HTMLScriptElement.supports("speculationrules")
) {
  const specScript = document.createElement("script");
  specScript.type = "speculationrules";

>   specRules = {

Reviewer 2: The `specRules` variable is undeclared. Probably you can just inline it into the `JSON.stringify` call.

Author: Thanks for the catch. I've decided to just declare it.

    prefetch: [
      {
        source: "list",
        urls: ["/next.html"],
      },
    ],
  };
  specScript.textContent = JSON.stringify(specRules);
  document.body.append(specScript);
} else {
  const linkElem = document.createElement("link");
  linkElem.rel = "prefetch";
  linkElem.href = "/next.html";
  document.head.append(linkElem);
}
```

## Detecting prefetched and prerendered pages

> This section looks at different ways to detect whether a requested page has bene prefetched or prerendered.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This section looks at different ways to detect whether a requested page has been prefetched or prerendered.
```

Author: Fixed, ta ;-)

### Server-side detection

> Prefetched and prerendered page requests are sent with the [Sec-Purpose](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Sec-Purpose) request header, for example:

Reviewer 2: Maybe give both examples? `Sec-Purpose: prefetch` for just prefetch; `Sec-Purpose: prefetch;prerender` for prerender.

Author: Good call; I have updated it to list both separately.

```http
Sec-Purpose: prefetch;prerender
```

> Servers can respond based on this header, for example to log prerender requests, return different content, or even prevent the prerender from happening. If a non-success response code is returned (not 200 or 304), then the page will not be prerendered. This is the easiest way to ensure that a page will not be prefetched/prerendered, although it is usually a better approach to allow the prefetch/prerender, but delay any actions that should only happen then the page is actually viewed, using JavaScript.

Reviewer 2: Probably replace "prerender" with "speculative load" throughout this paragraph, since we want to talk about both.

Author: I've updated it.

### JavaScript prefetch detection

When a page is prefetched, its {{domxref("PerformanceResourceTiming.deliveryType")}} entry will return a value of `"navigational-prefetch"`. For example, you could use a {{domxref("PerformanceObserver")}} to run a function when performance entries of type `"navigational-prefetch"` are received:

> ```js

Reviewer 2: The PerformanceObserver approach shouldn't be necessary. There's always a single navigation entry so you can do

```js
performance.getEntriesByType('navigation')[0].deliveryType === "navigational-prefetch"
```

Author: Good idea; updated.

const observer = new PerformanceObserver((list) => {
  for (const entry of list.getEntries()) {
    if (entry.deliveryType === "navigational-prefetch") {
      respondToPrefetch(); // Author-defined function
    }
  }
});

observer.observe({ type: "resource", buffered: true });
```

This technique is useful when measuring performance, or when you want to defer actions that might cause problems if they occur during prefetching (see [Unsafe prefetching](#unsafe_prefetching)).

### JavaScript prerender detection

To delay an activity while the page is prerendering, you can use the {{domxref("Document.prerendering")}} property — this will return `true` during page prerendering. You could for example wait until a page is prerendered before running some analytics:

> ```js

Reviewer 2: As in the article on this, we probably don't want to encourage the setInterval pattern; using `prerenderingchange` is better.

Author: Yup; I've updated the code examples here in the same way as you suggested for the `Document.prerendering` page.

For example:

- Sign-out URLs.
- Language switching URLs.
- "Add to cart" URLs.
- Sign-in flow URLs where the server causes an SMS to be sent, for example as a one-time password (OTP).
- URLs that increment a user's usage allowance numbers, such as consuming their monthly free article allowance or starting the timer on their monthly minutes.
- URLs that initiate server-side ad conversion tracking.

Such issues can be mitigated on the server by watching for the [`Sec-Purpose: prefetch`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Sec-Purpose) header as the requests come in, and then running specific code to defer problematic functionality. Later on, when the page is actually navigated to, you can initiate the deferred functionality via JavaScript if needed.

If the functionality only occurs under normal circumstances when JavaScript runs, then prefetching is safe, since the JavaScript will not run until activation.

> > **Note:** You can find more details about the detection code in the [Detecting prefetched and prerendered pages](#detecting_prefetched_and_prerendered_pages) section.

Reviewer 2: Probably move this up above the previous paragraph?

It is also potentially risky to prefetch a document whose server-rendered contents will change due to actions the user can take on the current page. This could include, for example, flash sale pages or movie theater seat maps. Test such cases carefully, and mitigate such issues by updating content once the page is loaded. See [Server-rendered varying state](#server-rendered_varying_state) for more details about these cases.

> **Note:** Browsers will cache prefetched pages for a short time (Chrome for example caches them for for 5 minutes) before discarding them, so in any case, your users might see content that is up to 5 minutes out of date.

> One final tip is to audit the URLs listed as disallowed in your [`Robots.txt`](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Robots.txt) file — normally URLs included here point to pages that can only be accessed by authenticated users, and therefore should not be included in search engine results. Many of these will be fine, but it can be a good place to find URLs unsafe for prefetching (i.e. they exhibit the conditions described above).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One final tip is to audit the URLs listed as disallowed in your [`Robots.txt`](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Robots.txt) file — normally URLs excluded here point to pages that can only be accessed by authenticated users, and therefore should not be included in search engine results. Many of these will be fine, but it can be a good place to find URLs unsafe for prefetching (i.e. they exhibit the conditions described above).
```

Author: I've fixed this in a slightly different way — "normally these URLs point to pages..."

I thought that the use of "excluded" might make people think we are talking about URLs not included in `Robots.txt`

### Unsafe prerendering

> Prerendering is more risky to adopt than prefetching and should therefore be done more sparingly, in cases where it is worth it. There are more unsafe conditions to watch out for with prerendering, and the risk to reward ratio is somewhat higher. Although the performance improvements can be larger, the potential for resource wastage is also larger.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Prerendering is more risky to adopt than prefetching and should therefore be done more sparingly, in cases where it is worth it. There are more unsafe conditions to watch out for with prerendering, so while the reward is higher, so is the risk. Although the performance improvements can be larger, the potential for resource wastage is also larger.
```

Author: Updated

> Prerendering is more risky to adopt than prefetching and should therefore be done more sparingly, in cases where it is worth it. There are more unsafe conditions to watch out for with prerendering, and the risk to reward ratio is somewhat higher. Although the performance improvements can be larger, the potential for resource wastage is also larger.

Reviewer 2: I think it's worth deemphasizing the resource wastage narrative a little bit, or at least putting it in context. In general, a prerender uses about as many resources as an iframe, and many sites include plenty of iframes. If the user never activates the prerender, then sure, that's a waste, but many sites have lots of iframes the user never cares about...

Author: Ah, that really does put it in perspective! OK, I've removed the last sentence of the above paragraph as it was a bit repetitious anyway. I've also included a note about it, earlier on when we first mention prerendering:

> **Note:** To put the amount of potential resource wastage in perspective, a prerender uses about the same amount of resources as rendering an {{htmlelement("iframe")}}.

When a prerender is done, the browser GETs the URL and renders and loads the content into an invisible tab. This includes running the content's JavaScript and loading all subresources, including those fetched by JavaScript. Content can be potentially unsafe to prerender if any of the following conditions are observed:

- The URL is [unsafe to prefetch](#unsafe_prefetching). Read the previous section first if you haven't already, and understand that these conditions also equally apply to unsafe prerendering.

> - The page's JavaScript modifies clent-side storage (for example [Web Storage](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Storage_API) or [IndexedDB](/en-US/docs/Web/API/IndexedDB_API)) on load in a way that may cause the page to be out of date once the user actually views the page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The page's JavaScript modifies clent-side storage (for example [Web Storage](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Storage_API) or [IndexedDB](/en-US/docs/Web/API/IndexedDB_API)) on load in a way that may cause confusing effects in other, non-prerendered pages that the user is currently looking at.
```

Author: Updated

> - The page runs JavaScript or loads images that cause side effects such as sending analytics, recording ad impressions, or otherwise modifying the state of the application as if the user had already interacted with it. Again, this can cause the page to be out-of-date once the user actually views it, affect the flow of the application, or cause incorrect performance or usage reporting. See [Server-rendered varying state](#server-rendered_varying_state) for more details about such use cases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The page runs JavaScript or loads images that cause side effects such as sending analytics, recording ad impressions, or otherwise modifying the state of the application as if the user had already interacted with it. Again, this can affect the flow of the application, or cause incorrect performance or usage reporting. See [Server-rendered varying state](#server-rendered_varying_state) for more details about such use cases.
```

Author: Updated

To mitigate such problems, you can use the following techniques:

- Watch for the [`Sec-Purpose: prerender`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Sec-Purpose) header on the server as the requests come in, and then run specific code to defer problematic functionality.
- Use the {{domxref("Document.prerenderingchange_event", "prerenderingchange")}} event to detect when the prerendered page is actually activated and run code as a result. This is useful in two cases:
  - Deferring code that may cause problems if it is run before the page is viewed. For example, you may want to wait until after activation to update client-side storage or modify server-side state using JavaScript. This can avoid situations when the UI and the application state become out of sync with one another, for example a shopping cart showing no items even though the user has added some.

>   - If the above is not possible, then you could still rerun code after the page is activated to bring the app up-to-date again. For example, a highly-dynamic flash sale page might rely on content updates coming in from a third-party library. If you can't delay the updates, you can always get fresh updates once the user views the page. Prerendered pages can be updated in real time using the [Broadcast Channel API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Broadcast_Channel_API). This guarantees that the user will see up-to-date content after prerendering activation, across multiple non-prerendered tabs if needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - If the above is not possible, then you could still rerun code after the page is activated to bring the app up-to-date again. For example, a highly-dynamic flash sale page might rely on content updates coming in from a third-party library. If you can't delay the updates, you can always get fresh updates once the user views the page. Prerendered pages can be updated in real time using the [Broadcast Channel API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Broadcast_Channel_API). This guarantees that the user will see up-to-date content after prerendering activation, and will also update non-prerendered tabs if needed.
```

- Manage your third-party analytics scripts carefully — if possible, use scripts that are prerendering-aware (for example use the {{domxref("Document.prerendering")}} property to defer running on prerendering pages) such as Google Analytics or NewRelic.
  - Note that cross-origin {{htmlelement("iframe")}} loads are delayed while prerendering, therefore most other third-party widgets such as adtech are actually safe to use while prerendering.
  - For third-party scripts that are not prerendering-aware, avoid loading them until after activation using the {{domxref("Document.prerenderingchange_event", "prerenderingchange")}} event, as mentioned earlier.

### Server-rendered varying state

> There are two main types of server-rendered state to be concerned with: **outdated state**, and **user-specific state**. This can cause cause both unsafe prefetching and prerendering.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are two main types of server-rendered state to be concerned with: **outdated state**, and **user-specific state**. This can cause both unsafe prefetching and prerendering.
```

Author: D'oh; updated!

  - `https://site.example/b` prerenders `https://site.example/c`. It will be prerendered in a logged-out state.
  - The user signs in to `https://site.example` in tab 1.
  - The user switches to tab 2 and clicks the link to `https://site.example/c`, which activates the prerendered page.
  - Tab 2 displays a signed-out view of `https://site.example/c`, which confuses the user since they thought they were logged in.

User-specific state problems can occur for other user settings, for example language settings, dark-mode preferences, or adding items to a cart. They can also occur when only a single tab is involved:

- Let's say the user visits `https://site.example/product`.
- `https://site.example.com/product` prerenders `https://site.example.com/cart`. It prerenders with 0 items in the cart.
- The user clicks on the "Add to cart" buttons, which initiates a fetch request to add the item to the user's cart (with no page reload).
- The user clicks on the link to `https://site.example.com/cart`, which activates the prerendered page.
- The user sees an empty cart, even though they just added something to it.

> The best mitigation for these cases is to perform client-side updates to the speculatively loaded pages. This means the user gets the benefit of the speculatively loaded content, which can be slightly out-of-date, then the state update can occur afterwards. As mentioned earlier, prerendered pages can be updated in real time using the [Broadcast Channel API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Broadcast_Channel_API). This guarantees that the user will see up-to-date content after prerendering activation, across multiple non-prerendered tabs if needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The best mitigation for these cases is to perform client-side updates to the speculatively loaded pages. This means the user gets the benefit of the speculatively loaded content, which can be slightly out-of-date, then the state update can occur afterwards. As mentioned earlier, prerendered pages can be updated in real time using the [Broadcast Channel API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Broadcast_Channel_API). This guarantees that the user will see up-to-date content after prerendering activation.
```

- [Screen Capture API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Screen_Capture_API): {{domxref("MediaDevices.getDisplayMedia()")}}
- [Web Share API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Share_API): {{domxref("Navigator.share()")}}
- {{domxref("Window.open()")}}

APIs that require the containing document to be focused:

- [Clipboard API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Clipboard_API): {{domxref("Clipboard.read()")}}, {{domxref("Clipboard.readText()")}}, {{domxref("Clipboard.write()")}}, {{domxref("Clipboard.writeText()")}}

APIs that require the containing document's {{domxref("Document.visibilityState")}} to be `"visible"`:

- [Picture-in-Picture API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Picture-in-Picture_API): {{domxref("HTMLVideoElement.requestPictureInPicture()")}} (requires the containing document's visibility state to be `"visible", _or_ [transient activation](/en-US/docs/Glossary/Transient_activation))
- [Screen Wake Lock API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Screen_Wake_Lock_API): {{domxref("WakeLock.request()")}}

### Other restricted features

- Download links, i.e. {{htmlelement("a")}} and {{htmlelement("area")}} elements with the `download` attribute.

>   (for example, prompts)

Reviewer 2: The download will just be delayed, actually. So maybe this can move into the asynchronous API deferral section.

Author: I've kept it in the same place, but explained the nature of the restriction better:

> Download links, i.e. {{htmlelement("a")}} and {{htmlelement("area")}} elements with the `download` attribute, will have their downloads delayed until prerendering has finished.

I'd rather do this, as it is an HTML feature, so isn't really thought of as an API in the traditional sense

> - No cross site navigations: Any prerendering document that navigates to a different site will be immediately discarded before a request to that other site is sent,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- No cross site navigations: Any prerendering document that navigates to a different site will be immediately discarded before a request to that other site is sent.
```

Author: Updated

- Restricted URLs: Prerendering documents cannot host non-HTTP(S) top-level URLs. In particular, they cannot host:
  - `javascript:` URLs
  - `data:` URLs
  - `blob:` URLs

>   - `about:` URLs, including `about:blank` and `about:srcdoc`

Reviewer 2: Maybe mention here also that any navigations to such URLs will cause the prerender to be immediately discarded.

Author: Good call; I've included it.

- Session storage: {{domxref("Window.sessionStorage")}} can be used, but the behavior is very specific, to avoid breaking sites that expect only one page to access the tab's session storage at a time. A prerendered page therefore starts out with a clone of the tab's session storage state from when it was created. Upon activation, the prerendered page's storage clone is discarded, and the tab's main storage state is used instead. Pages that use session storage can use the {{domxref("Document.prerenderingchange_event", "prerenderingchange")}} event to detect when this storage swap occurs.

> - {{domxref("Window.print()")}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- {{domxref("Window.print()")}}: any calls to this method are ignored.
```

Author: Added

See [`<script type="speculationrules">`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/script/type/speculationrules) for a full explanation of the available syntax.

> **Note:** As speculation rules use a `<script>` element, they need to be explicitly allowed in the [`Content-Security-Policy`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Security-Policy) [`script-src`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Security-Policy/script-src) directive if the site includes it. This is done by adding the `'inline-speculation-rules'` source along with a hash- or nonce-source.

### Using prefetching

Including `prefetch` rules inside `<script type=speculationrules> ... </script>` will cause supporting browsers to download the response body of the referenced pages, but none of the subresources referenced by the page. When a prefetched page is navigated to, it will render much more quickly than if it were not prefetched.

> The results are kept in a per-document in-memory cache. If you prefetch something the user doesn't navigate to, it is generally a waste of resources, although the result may populate the HTTP cache if headers allow. That said, the upfront cost of a prefetch is much smaller than the upfront cost of a prerender, so you are encouraged to adopt prefetching broadly, for example prefetching all of the significant pages on your site, provided they are safe to prefetch (see [Unsafe speculative loading conditions](#unsafe_speculative_loading_conditions) for more details).
> 
> > **Note:** Such is the nature of the per-document in-memory cache, any cached prefetches are discarded when you navigate away from the current page, except of course a prefetched document that you then navigate to.

Reviewer: FWIW I probably would have embedded it (everywhere):

```suggestion
The results are kept in a per-document in-memory cache: any cached prefetches are discarded when you navigate away from the current page, except of course a prefetched document that you then navigate to.
What this means is that if you prefetch something the user doesn't navigate to, it is generally a waste of resources, although the result may populate the HTTP cache if headers allow. That said, the upfront cost of a prefetch is much smaller than the upfront cost of a prerender, so you are encouraged to adopt prefetching broadly, for example prefetching all of the significant pages on your site, provided they are safe to prefetch (see [Unsafe speculative loading conditions](#unsafe_speculative_loading_conditions) for more details).
```

- No cross-site navigations: Any prerendering document that navigates to a different site will be immediately discarded before a request to that other site is sent.
- Restricted URLs: Prerendering documents cannot host non-HTTP(S) top-level URLs. Including the following URL types will cause the prerender to be immediately discarded:
  - `javascript:` URLs
  - `data:` URLs
  - `blob:` URLs
  - `about:` URLs, including `about:blank` and `about:srcdoc`
- Session storage: {{domxref("Window.sessionStorage")}} can be used, but the behavior is very specific, to avoid breaking sites that expect only one page to access the tab's session storage at a time. A prerendered page therefore starts out with a clone of the tab's session storage state from when it was created. Upon activation, the prerendered page's storage clone is discarded, and the tab's main storage state is used instead. Pages that use session storage can use the {{domxref("Document.prerenderingchange_event", "prerenderingchange")}} event to detect when this storage swap occurs.

> - {{domxref("Window.print()")}}: Any calls to this method are ignored.

Reviewer 2: Let's also mention alert/confirm/prompt, which get similar treatment. (They're the "simple dialogs" mentioned in https://wicg.github.io/nav-speculation/prerendering.html#patch-modals .)

alert() immediately returns without showing anything; confirm() immediately returns false without showing anything; and prompt() immediately returns the empty string without showing anything.

Author: OK, great. I've added a bullet/sub-bullets to the same section, to cover this.
